[Music]
am i the only person who does not find
depression
a depressing topic of conversation i
should find it quite uplifting to talk
about depression and that's because
you know i remember my father once uh
met a surgeon at a cocktail party or
something like this and uh
my father asked him well what do you do
what do you specialize in and he said
cancer
my father being a shallow and rather a
stupid person said oh well that's
depressing and the dark side back no
it's not i get to save people's lives
every day i get to change people's lives
the better every day
of course it's not depressing and the
doctor said words to the effect that
idiots always tell them it's depressing
and it's like no it's not there are all
kinds of areas of medicine that are
really depressing and doing surgery on
cancer is not one of them
he gets the he gets to see people make
progress make you approve everything i
gotta say the same thing to you right
now about depression all right i don't
find it depressing because i actually
think people can change and i think
people's lives are improved
just by having the conversation just by
learning to look at these things and
think about these things analytically
right so like the surgery that's
involved we're doing it right now all
right in it in as much as there is a
cure
this is it okay
now you know we have a funny situation
right now this is september 16th
uh 2021. two different fans of the
channel
who wrote in to tell me that they saw
vegan gains uh did watch my videos and
did make a reply unfortunately he didn't
actually watch them from beginning to
end he didn't actually listen to them
uh in the old days we'd say he fast
forwarded but it's not really fast
forwarding he kind of clicked around
with his mouse so he didn't actually get
the argument of the video when he didn't
have the patience to hear it and
nevertheless you know the message got
through to him on some level that there
are some people who are willing to
criticize the choices he's making and
the rationale he's presenting in terms
of depression and the the presumed you
know cure for depression now
the single most striking
and stupid aspect of the case vegan
gains is now making is how closely
parallel it is to the excuses for eating
meat
offered by many of his fellow vegans who
became ex-vegan
how similar it is to the argument
offered right now by someone like john
venus notice that most of this video is
not going to be a critique of vegans
it's not going to be dealing with what
i'm doing right now the criticisms argue
most of it's going to be a positive
discussion of what depression is and and
what to do about it so on and so forth
but you know um
what richard says
um
in shoring up his defense of taking
antidepressants is that he just felt bad
he just felt so bad he felt he knew
there was something wrong and he felt he
tried everything
to take care of it he felt he felt he
tried everything you know we're going to
come back to this of course there are a
lot of things he didn't try he felt he'd
done everything he could so then he
turned to antidepressants as the only
thing that could help him then what do
you know based on equally
certain a sense of feeling he felt that
this drug helped him now in his live
stream responding to this he indicates
that he has seen some of the research
about the fact that really these
antidepressants have no positive effect
or an incredibly trivial positive effect
or that the positive effect can be
completely attributed to the the placebo
effect the drugs in this sense don't
work they don't work in the same way
that aspirin works they don't work in
the same way that
the treatment for diabetes works you
know in terms of actually managing your
insulin levels and thus managing
diabetes not a cure for diabetes but you
know it treats the symptoms that he is
aware on some level and to some extent
that this is [ __ ] in plain english
right but he comes back to the same
defense of his choices that john venus
himself relies on right the narrative is
his own desperation
his certainty that there's something
biologically wrong with him that he has
a medically real problem with no
evidence based on subjective feeling and
then his certainty that the cure works
again based on the same kind of
subjective
feeling
well richard you're in good company and
coincidentally you've been criticizing
john venus at exactly the same time so
if you don't know who john venus is he
is a bodybuilder
uh 31 years old now i believe
and for some mysterious reason after
years of bodybuilding and pushing his
physical frame to its limits day after
day week after week he started having
joint pain
what what a surprise
what percentage of people who go into
bodybuilding suffer from
you know did you guys know any ballet
dancers you know people in the ballet
who complained about you there were a
lot of lines or you know do you guys
know anyone doing uh brazilian jiu jitsu
that has ankle problems and knee
problems there are some sports where
certain chronic conditions are
incredibly common because of the nature
of the strain you're putting a body some
people can cope with it some can okay so
he's a bodybuilder who has joint pain
and he reasons it through in precisely
the same way that richard reasons
through his depression i tried
everything you know so he claims he
tried everything well he didn't try
quitting bodybuilding
you know like you know if you know
someone i've known a couple people like
this people who are in things like
ballet and modern dance and they have
chronic pain conditions and what the
doctor tells them is yeah you can stop
doing ballet or you could stop doing
modern dance you know guess what you
know
you've uh you you've in some ways
specifically you've worn away the
cartilage and these joints or something
you've done some damage and guess what
basically if you continue doing this
you're going to continue getting this
kind of chronic pain
so you know he he convinces himself and
you know by the way in john venice's
case we don't know to what extent it's
psychosomatic we don't know to what
extent it's stress related
he has other problems in his life he
used to be wealthy now he's poor he used
to be famous now he's a nobody
uh he now has two kids he's responsible
for raising two kids he's moved back
into his parents house he's sleeping on
their floor
to what extent it's perception versus
reality we already have a question but
even if we take it that this is a
physically real pain in his joints with
a very obvious cause
and that when he does take a break when
he stops lifting weights mysteriously
this is uh the pain disappears he has
the same rationale vegan gains as he
started eating meat meat dairy eggs he
started eating non-vegan
food and then he feels so much better
all right now we've heard this
if you follow veganism we've heard all
kinds of vegans claim that eating meat
solved their sleeping problems solve
their sexual problems solve their stress
disorder solve all kinds of
self-evidently mental aberrations like
things that are only subjectively real
problems that are ultimately attitudinal
not biological or physical and they feel
completely certain that eating meat
cured their depression richard in the
same way you feel certain that taking
this pill cured the depression and you
know what when you sit down and talk to
them about it and for some of you you'll
never have this experience i have had
this experience the next vegans so i'll
just say i knew an ex-vegan i could say
this doesn't really need to be proud but
i knew an ex-vegan who had studied
nutritional science
and back when she promoted veganism she
did talk about it in a very kind of
scientific way in terms of exact wasn't
that okay so tell me something
on a molecule by molecule level what is
the nutrition what is the what is the
substance that you believe you're
getting from meat and eggs now that you
were not getting before from a
combination of broccoli and beans and
potatoes all the stuff that was in your
vegan diet
and you know in my experience talking to
these people some of them are just
completely insane
but you know in my experience talking
these people they will admit to you that
there was nothing absent from their diet
as a vegan that's now present in meat
and eggs they will admit to you it
doesn't make sense they can't provide a
mechanistic scientifically valid
explanation for why their joint pain was
cured or why their psychological pain
was true or why their digestive problems
were cured and again to what extent
these things are psychological realities
versus biological realities
you know why it was their sex life
suddenly got better like seriously we
had no joke
claims about this claims about getting
an erection and women having orgasms
suddenly your sex life gets better
because you started eating meat dairy
and eggs yeah well that that could be
psychosomatic that could be more you
know a problem with your attitude it
could be you know could be a lot of
things rather than an actual biological
reality of a nutritional deficiency and
then conversely of course if it were a
real nutritional deficiency if for
example you have a zinc
sorry a zinc deficient diet you can have
a diet that's too low in zinc whether
it's vegan or non-vegan but like if you
actually have a deficiency you can cure
it within veganism like oh well your
problem is you're not getting enough
zinc then you start getting more snakes
so
you cannot get john venus to reason
through for you in a cause and effect
way
that his joint pain
is caused by something absent in his
diet as a vegan that is now being
supplied that's present in his diet as a
meat eater and that guy he's not an
expert but he's done enough research he
knows what a nutritionally adequate
vegan diet is there's no way he can he
can think it through there's no way he
can he can reason through for you like
even if you want to believe him you say
look
you have made a scientific discovery you
have figured out that the cure for joint
pain is eating the flesh of a dead cow
so this is a major breakthrough all
right now in the world how many millions
of people eat beef every day and have
joint pain
how many bodybuilders
eat beef and have chronic joint pain
well john venus you have discovered
something miraculous about the cause of
joint pain and the cure for it that has
never been known before and we are
sincerely trying to figure out what it
is so i want you to walk walk me through
this
let's figure out exactly what your diet
was deficient in before
and let's figure out what is the
molecule what is the chemical the unique
thing that is found in the flesh of a
dead cow that you can't get in a vegan
diet and then we could do an experiment
once you figure out what it is like
let's say it's something like zinc it's
like oh well okay so you were zinc
deficient now let's try giving you a
vegan diet that's rich in zinc and see
if that could like if it were something
that could be
specified or iterated right it would be
in this sense falsifiable you'd be able
to make scientific progress thinking
about it think about it scientifically
okay
now look um
again i want to talk about this in a
kind of a more profound way all right i
have no
evidence at my end just watching
richard's videos i have no evidence that
his life has changed for the better
since he started taking this pill i have
none i have no reason to think that from
an objective detached perspective he is
less depressed now or more happy that
he's improved in any way
psychologically compared to compared to
what he was before all right but he
claims it he claims it so we can
challenge him in the same way and say
okay richard why don't you reason this
through with me okay why don't you
explain to me
how scientifically
this could make sense
and we know his whole psychological
history in as much as he's presented it
on youtube okay so you are someone
who suffered from brain injury you had
cte right you had
serious concussion and brain injury as a
young man
you're someone who's reported struggling
with hallucinations right your whole
life visual
and auditory hallucinations you're also
someone who has believed in one miracle
cure after another thinking that it
would cure your hallucinations cure your
depression right that suddenly you have
been cured okay in the past you
attributed that to the vegan diet that
veganism had solved your mental problems
that formerly you'd been crazy and now
you're not crazy thanks to veganism and
then that didn't last right you were
optimistic that veganism had changed
your life forever and guess what it
didn't work okay you had the same
pattern played out again with taking
quote-unquote magic mushrooms
hallucinogenic mushrooms you thought
you'd made this huge breakthrough you
changed your attitude you changed your
outlook you cured
your psychological problems including
depression and a certain kind of
misanthropy that you used to call being
a sociopath or being a psychopath you
thought you had been cured when you take
these mushrooms you have a pattern of
doing this again and again and again and
now
you're taking a prescription
antidepressant and you are attributing
to it a miraculous transformation that
is no more scientifically believable
than john venus claiming that he's cured
his joint pain through eating meat
okay it's not we can't put together the
etiology here there is no plausible
etiology you know what there is another
plausible explanation richard and the
plausible explanation is that there is
no cure for what's wrong with you you
are the same man now that you were
before you became vegan then you thought
veganism had more actually transformed
you you're the same man now that you
were before you took hallucinogenic
mushrooms you're the same guy
struggling with the same problems and
there have been different times in your
life when what changed was your attitude
was when you got more motivated or less
motivated when you were more or less
self-pity what changed were your
feelings okay and your your feelings
matter okay i'm not saying that to
dismiss or denigrate them there are
people
who when they were vegan had a terrible
sex life
they had trouble sleeping they had
trouble with their digestion okay and
then they switch to eating a diet that
includes meat and eggs and all of these
problems are miraculously solved that's
real
okay that's real
that's their real experience richard and
you would be the first person to attack
them and shut them down and denigrate
them and and dismiss
their excuses okay
it's not hard for me to understand
sympathetically and analytically how
someone's whole life could get better
coinciding with quitting the vegan
movement walking away from the vegan
movement you know one of the reasons why
your sex life might have got better is
because you're having sex with other
people now that you're having sex with
people who
you know eat meat and drink alcohol and
stuff whereas before you were with a
puritanical bunch of like there are a
lot of things i can relate to there and
i can understand why your digestion got
better because you stopped eating beans
from
uh mexican restaurants you know like
there there are all kinds of facts and
factors and that that you know
i can sympathize with it and understand
why that's subjectively real for people
who quit veganism and go back to eating
meat but it's not scientifically real
all right that's just your subjective
experience that's just in the realm of
of your feelings
and at the end of the day we all have to
make tough decisions about what is the
right thing to do
um
[Music]
all right i'm gonna i'm happy to reply
to your questions people in the audience
oh sir most
people in the audience if we can get 24
thumbs up it'll help more people join
the conversation if other people have
intelligent things to say um obviously i
really only want to talk about things
that are on topic so if you
don't ask me about buddhist philosophy
unless it's relevant
sometimes i get totally wrong but if you
guys want to see something on topic and
that's on my level i'm happy to have you
guys participate and again if you guys
hit the thumbs up it'll hold more people
participate as the live streams to run
go on listen yeah so i just wanted to
say that
says that he has tried everything
including positive thinking and i just
want to point out how that is different
than what you're talking about yes this
an attitudinal difference another way to
say it is also your temperament your
temper
right
it's not necessarily just thinking
positively uh and i want to
get more of your perspective on that
okay i have a lot that's what this video
is all about
okay so look you know one of richard's
problems and for many of you the
audience is gonna be a problem
and for melissa before she fell in love
with me it was a problem for her too is
that you don't have people who love you
and you can provide a detached
analytical perspective on your life
so you know i i i could i could give all
kinds of examples of this uh from this
relationship you don't have somebody in
your life who knows you and loves you
and cares about you but is actually
detached enough to tell you when you're
wrong
[Laughter]
tell you when you're not good at
something
like you're look you're not talented at
this this is not something you're great
you know tell it and really inform you
know the the decision that you're making
no only wrong there's a there's
certainly a role for positive
encouragement in life but you can also
you can have a little bit too much great
you know there's sometimes where you
need someone to discourage you in life
and really you know ask you tough
questions okay um
you ever had a friend who was muslim
and this friend of yours who's muslim
says the same things richard is saying
so if you guys haven't heard his live
stream most of you can probably just
imagine this because you know his
character
they say to you that they're depressed
and they don't know why
and they've tried everything
so they're going to start using this
drug they say the same thing richard's
been saying they say oh well my life is
so wonderful and they tell you the
things they do they pray five times a
day they have a great life they have a
really good relationship with their uh
their temple with the uh with the ulama
with the religious community at their
temple and uh i don't know
they get along with well with their
parents and they they earn money at
their their job and stuff and you know
um
they keep insisting you that they have a
totally happy life and they've tried
everything and there's just no reason
for them to be unhappy they can't
understand
why they're
depressed so therefore they have to turn
to this mind-altering drug to solve
their problem that therefore must be
biologically real now i've already
hinted at this but let's just make it
really clear okay
that is just as fallacious and inference
as john venus assuming that his joint
pain is caused by the lack of meat in
his diet
okay i i'm willing to assume it's real
like it could be psychosomatic it could
be that he just has joint pain for
psychological reasons i mentioned a
bunch of stress left but if he is
feeling joint pain you know like oh well
i notice you bench press 300 pounds like
well bench pressing 300 pounds could
cause joint pain and you know what a lot
of bodybuilders go through this back
when you were
21 you could bench press 300 pounds and
not have dripping and now you're 31
[ __ ] welcome to my world you know what
i mean it's no i'm i'm in my 40s now i
know the difference i know what it's
like to lift weights at 21 at 31 at 41.
it's not the same and there you go okay
okay
you are making a leap of inference and
saying i've got this joint pain i've
i've tried everything i've tried
everything
therefore it must be a biologically real
condition and therefore there's this
cause-and-effect relationship in john
venus case it's because he doesn't have
meat in his diet because he has a vegan
diet and now he's going to fill that in
right vegan gains is going through the
same sequence of fallacious steps in his
reason right
and it's very telling he believes in it
he believes in every so he doesn't
question it he doesn't have any ironical
detachment about it okay
now um i am actually thinking of a
particular muslim guy i knew when i when
i give this example and you may not have
had this experience with a friend
but you may have had a friend and you
can never really know you can never be
certain but it's like dude i've known
you for about a year now and i'm pretty
sure that you're gay
that's the feeling i have about you and
when we talk about
women or your sex life or when i see the
way you uh look at pictures in a
magazine the way you look at pictures of
men versus pictures of women as you flip
their magazine
when i'm around you partly it's
mannerisms partly it's behavior part
specific conversations if you haven't
actually had sex with someone yourself
you don't really know if they're
straight or gay and by the way even then
a lot of people are surprised you can be
married to someone and find out later
that they're gay when you thought
i've known people who've been through
that i have i've known people
but you know what you might have a
friend and from your detached
perspective you can say look dude my
perspective on you is that you're gay
that you're a repressed homosexual and
you're never really gonna be happy like
the reason why you're depressed is that
you're trying to live as a heterosexual
person
and it's making you miserable and no
matter how much you tell me you have a
great job
a great relation with your family and
that you love your religion and your
religion is the most positive thing in
your life i'm telling you from my
detached outside perspective
that actually your religion is the
reason you're depressed that you are not
going to be happy unless you challenge
and overturn this religion and put it
out of your life you know
and that that may be the most obvious
thing in the world from from my
perspective from the outside looking in
right and he will not see it that way at
all he is saying i've tried everything
did you try converting the buddhism did
you try rejecting islam and joining a
different religion
by the way i'm also a critic of buddhism
there's a lot wrong with buddhism but
you can imagine what a transformation
that would be in someone's life right to
go from one religion to another totally
different religion in that way you know
and and you know to go from a religion
that requires you to live in celibacy
until marriage to a religion that allows
you a lot of scope
for sexual freedom you know that's
that's a big difference a religion
that's homophobic to a religion that's
basically homo encouraging or homo
embracing or whatever it's kind of pro
you know go on vacation in thailand and
you'll see what i'm talking about
thailand is a terrible buddhist country
in case enough
these are big changes that they aren't
even considering to them it's
unthinkable to them it's in the range of
the impossible
right and to me it's the most obvious
thing in the world you say
you've tried
everything and from my perspective you
ain't tried
jack
[ __ ]
you haven't even taken the first step
you're not even asking the first
questions about why it is that you're
you're quote unquote depressed
we have a problem as human beings this
is one of the oldest
problems
in philosophy
naturally when thinking
we gather ideas into categories
we can you can say we gather experiences
into ideas
and then we gather ideas into categories
and we start to regard the categories as
more real
than the things they describe
and they're not
and the category is just a way of
thinking it's just like a shorthand it's
just like a nickname
to gather a bunch of different things
together
right
depression is not real
i can prove it to you just using these
three examples
okay
vegan gains can say that he's depressed
john venus
can say that he's depressed
this muslim guy who's a repressed
homosexual and is really piously going
he's studying the philosophy of islam
and everything too he's not just a
passive muslim he's really deeply
involved
in the religion he can say
he's depressed all right these are
different examples gathered into one
category they do not have the same
medically real condition and there is
absolutely no way
that all three of them can cure or treat
this so-called condition by taking the
same pill
john venus moved back into his parents
house
he's sleeping on the floor he has two
kids he has a wife his wife doesn't work
his wife doesn't have a job
he used to be famous now he's a nobody
he used to be
rich he said a lot of money coming in
maybe racism exaggeration whatever he
was
he used to be part of
an ecological and political movement
called veganism that was so meaningful
to him and so rewarding
and he probably had people
sending a message on instagram every day
saying that he's beautiful and he's an
inspiration and he's saving the planet
he's been also probably getting messages
from people who wanted to have sex with
him probably
just a wild wild speculation on my part
maybe everyone respected his marriage
and nobody tried to have sex i don't
know okay
and now
people regard him as a crank
people regard him as crazy and stupid
you know they know what he has to say
about space aliens and spirituality and
stuff right they regard him as a loser
and he's not vegan anymore and
he's still handsome right
okay
why why do you think he's depressed what
do you like
he's got everything he's got what do you
mean you know
he's tried everything oh it might must
be it must be the meat in his diet it
must be you know it must be vegan it
must be the diet right it can't be the
kids
of course there's a [ __ ] dude you know
it's your life
and your attitude towards it your
problems
including the ones that you have never
perceived as problems yourself
the vast majority of muslim people have
never looked at their own religion and
thought it was a problem they may think
it's the most wonderful thing in their
lives christian people jewish people
many religions like this they say what
do you mean going to church every sunday
that's the best thing in my calendar
it's so uplifting it's so wonderful and
to say that person no that's why you're
depressed
you're depressed because you're a
[ __ ] cult member and this is
ridiculous and the stuff you believed in
when you were like six years old you
can't believe it anymore and you're
repressing that like you don't want to
admit to yourself that you don't believe
in santa claus anymore and it's it's
tearing you apart you know what i mean
no look sorry i mean there are there are
a lot of examples
um
so i i knew okay i'll anonymize this i
knew someone a woman who was religious
as a child and a teenager
now she's not
now she's an atheist
and guess what all the decisions she
made that shaped the rest of her life
were made back when she was a teenager
right
where she went to school
what she majored in what his career was
what supported me what her career was
who she got married to
who she had kids with
no no she's stuck with those
consequences for the rest of her life
and she bitterly hates her own parents
for having put her in this position and
she bitterly came to hate her own
husband and
she she's to some extent has talked
about bitterly hating her own kids
because she didn't want this life she
figured out too late this isn't who she
is this isn't what she wants to do she
quit the religion she had to force her
husband to quit the relationship she
basically divorced him and said look if
you want to get back together with me
you have to change your whole life you
have to quit the religion and everything
else too and there are other things she
can't change she can't go back to
college she can't go back to university
she can't start a new career right okay
okay oh wow
that sounds like depression
that sounds like an example that fits
into this category and now my way of
perceiving the world is that categories
are more real than the things they
describe than the things that groups so
oh i know just the cure for you
oh yeah yeah gee that's too bad huh grew
up in a religion and you can't believe
in that religion anymore and now you're
stuck with this husband and these kids
and this career path you didn't want you
you really want to do something totally
different in your career and you can't
huh
take this pill
it worked for richard
it worked for vegan gains therefore it
must have a cause and effect efficacy
that's going to cure all these other
people's problems doesn't matter oh
you're you're homosexual oh you hate
your wife like whatever
oh no you know the problem isn't you
the problem isn't your attitude the
problem isn't what are you going to do
about it the problem isn't that you need
to get out and solve your problems the
problem is in your life oh no no no no
no no no no no you've already tried
everything else remember how crucial
that is to richard's reasoning here he
had tried
everything else just like john venus
right he tried everything else his his
his life is wonderful
just like the person who's still going
to church or still going to the mosque
in islam the true believer oh my life is
there's nothing wrong with it there's
nothing i could change there's nothing i
could do differently
all right and for a detached outside
perspective like if you're if you know
this guy the particular guy i'm thinking
of like it would be the most shocking
thing in the world to say to him well
you know
you could quit your religion and start
sucking dick
all right it's the other thing about an
outside perspective right
maybe you're wrong
right like maybe i think this guy is gay
and maybe he goes and tries it and he's
like oh
it turns out he's just a really
effeminate
straight guy you know what i mean like
that that exists like my perspective my
advice
may be wrong you know what i mean
right he doesn't perceive
his religion as a problem it's built
into the presuppositions of his life in
a way where he's never going to
challenge it he's never going to
question it john venus
doesn't question the real cause of his
joint pain right he doesn't question
really all the the sources of his
psychological anguish and suffering and
misery in his life we could go on about
the psychology of
pardon me the psychology of john venus
at great length right there are two
fallacious steps there one is i've tried
everything nothing worked
untrue and then the second step is
therefore
therefore i have a biologically real
condition called depression okay so guys
i'm
i'm self-critical i've i've been through
things in my life
35 people you've been here for half an
hour and you haven't hit the thumbs up
button what the hell is the matter with
you come on hit the thumbs up button
more people can join us and join this
conversation you know
um
i'm divorced
i used to be married to someone
or i could totally say i was depressed
because of the woman i was married to
i was really married to the wrong person
and it was horrible
and she made my life hell
every day
okay now i don't like to use i don't
like to use 21st century watchwords and
i don't like to make allegations
against my ex-wife and i think that
that's clear enough
frankly okay waking up in the same
apartment with that woman and sleeping
in the same apartment with that one was
absolutely terrible
and for me
worked for her
great relationship for her not for me
all right
and um
you know if i had gone to a psychiatrist
at that time of course they'd give me
antidepressants they'd give me anything
i asked for right if you go and you talk
about how unhappy you are and how
everything's unraveled in your life and
you can't do anything you want anymore
and how miserable you are with your
relationship of course
of course and you know i'm going to go
out on a limb here and say that those
antidepressants they will not even make
you as happy as
cigarettes
alcohol
cocaine
you know there are drugs you can take um
you know i hear
drugs like um
you know the drugs they give for uh
attention deficit disorder uh those kind
of steroids also taking testosterone you
know but people say that if you start
doing these steroids you know to get
this big boost in energy you can shoot
someone up with performance enhancing
drugs guess what you still got a bad
marriage
you know what i mean you're still
unhappy and rushed and you can say
you've tried everything well you didn't
try getting divorced
like you know
sorry you know what i mean what if
what if you can never be happy in this
marriage
and you can list off the reasons
or not you know what i mean
it really doesn't matter now just just
tell me something
is this rare
what i'm talking about to you
whatever country you're living in you
can look up the divorce rate it's
probably more than 50
a few countries in the world that's down
at 40 or 30
pretty much every 60 is more likely do
you think it's you think it's really
unusual
to be so unhappy with your marriage that
you're depressed
what
really
for the man or the woman sometimes both
sometimes both people
are miserable because it's not it's not
uncommon
it's not uncommon at all okay you know
so other i'm just saying this to talk
about some problems in my life and i
want to say this also because
i said before
most people don't have someone who loves
them and cares about them but can
provide an attached outside perspective
right and then beyond that even if you
do have that person they can be wrong
someone might think you're gay and
you're not gay well the reason why
you're unhappy is that you're a
repressed homosexual and they're they're
mistaken that could be right but they
could be mistaken that might be their
their perspective on it i think everyone
who knew us as a couple back when i was
married me and my wife they thought we
were this tremendously inspiring couple
we were both very hard-working
intellectuals and that's how they saw us
they thought this was this amazing
relationship between two amazing people
in terms of what we were doing with our
lives and they're right i'm like there's
a sense in which that's a correct
outsider's perspective and anyone at
that time they might have said that my
marriage was the best thing in my life
or they might have presumed that i don't
know if they said it to my face i said
well
you know there's things you don't know
you know you don't you don't know what
was like for me to be married to her you
know what what my what my life was like
waking up in that apartment every day
and how how she treated me and you know
obviously for me now looking back i
could say i should have gotten out of
that marriage you know much earlier
the point is this
whatever is wrong with that marriage
cannot be cured
by taking this pill okay
whatever is wrong with john venus's
wrists and elbows and neck
with neck pain
cannot be cured by eating steak by
eating dead cow flesh it can't be
there's no plausible
mechanism there right and when you
gather together this diverse category of
human experiences of misery the things
that make us unhappy the things that
make us depressed
right
they don't belong in one category
together even in the same way that many
different bodybuilders experiencing
joint pain
belong in one category together we're
talking about completely different
people with completely different
experiences and completely different
perspectives so really quick some of you
guys so again hit the thumbs up you
stingy bastards if you change your mind
later you think it's a bad video you can
undo the thumbs up okay
you can you can you can unclick thumbs
up or you can change the thumbs down but
come on we need more we need more thumbs
up in here some more people could join
us uh could join this conversation so
look guys i've studied many different
languages in my life okay
um
and studying a language especially a
really hard language like chinese or
japanese you need to have a ton of
positive motivation all right
it would have been easy for someone who
met me when i was studying chinese and i
think actually several professors who
saw me at that time i had this kind of
conversation with them i don't remember
talking to students like my fellow
students this way
someone could perceive me studying
chinese and say wow
this is so wonderful for you you must be
so happy this is like the greatest
positive opportunity your lifetime and i
see you're working so hard at chinese
and this must be so rewarding for you
you must be so happy about it
and i would be able to say back no
this is unbelievably depressing like
this is like this is like a really dark
period in my life
now this person again viewing it from
the outside they could say oh well the
other the person sitting in the desk
next to you they're doing the same work
on chinese and maybe they're just
totally happy yeah i'm learning i'm
learning how to write chinese
you know
you're doing the same work in the same
book and the same class
and you're telling me that for you it's
depressing
but for the person sitting next to you
it's a happy or uplifting or wonderful
thing
why is that
now some people will go through the same
thought process richard goes through
vegan is going to be like oh well it
must be that there's something
biologically wrong with you you have a
because you have nothing to be said
about you have a wonderful apartment
you're enrolled in a new university
degree you're studying this language
this is so rewarding and you're good at
it you're like the smartest kid in the
class not really a kid because i was in
my 30s at the time but you know like
okay everyone thinks you're a genius
you're really good at this you know this
must be this must be so wonderful and if
you don't if you don't feel happy
with your quote unquote objectively good
life right also i just had enough money
for food and everything i wasn't
starving i had a youtube channel a lot
of positive things and i'm like
oh oh well then it must be you have to
take this pill
the same pill that works for people
who've gone through divorce or some some
totally different reason same people the
same pill that's given to people who are
grossly overweight the same pill that's
given to people who are grossly
underweight some people are unhappy and
starve themselves some people get
unhappy and ovary doesn't matter same
pill
same pill for all all experiences of
human misery okay well you know guess
what homeboy we could now sit here and
have a one hour conversation about
exactly why it was so depressing to be
studying chinese at that time of my life
you know guess what it's not what i
wanted to be doing with my life i was
really cornered into it right and there
were problems with the university and
the particular university professors and
the struggle
there was a lot wrong
in this situation there were a lot of
reasons for me to be anxious and worried
about the future and unhappy and for me
to resent and regret studying chinese
anyway now look the particular professor
went crazy
professor teaching chinese and i had to
drop chinese i had to stop taking her
class then i started studying japanese
okay again the person sitting next to me
i remember one guy who was very happy in
that class he was an idiot an incredibly
stupid guy he was studying oh you know
i like japanese cartoons i like japanese
comic books this is great i always
wanted to study japanese here i am
studying japanese there are people who
are complete [ __ ] idiots who are
totally happy in that class studying
japanese okay of course i'm miserable of
course i'm depressed this is an
incredibly dark difficult time in my
life and the reason is not a
biologically real difference between me
and the students sitting in the desk
next to me right it's a difference in
attitude it's a difference in my
appreciation and interpretation of the
situation and it's real i can't just
adopt his attitude so i can't as a i
don't know how old it was then let's say
it was 35 whatever i was 35 38 you know
as a 38 year old man
who has a divorce and a child and has
specific career goals and who moved here
and enrolled in this university to study
one language and i have a background i
used to study cambodian and lotion these
are my concerns this is what i'm trying
to do i cannot adopt the attitude of an
idiot who is an engineering manger right
he's doing electrical engineering and
he's going to get himself a job working
in a calculator factory in japan it was
something like that he was going to work
in a in an electronics factory in japan
and he's just so happy he studies
electrical engineering and this is like
the most intellectually stimulating
thing in his life because the other
stuff he studies is so boring this is
great studying japanese well it's not
great for me
all right it's it's for me it's part of
the greatest tragedy of my adult life
like i'm in a situation at this same
university and you can't find the
explanation by looking at the desk or
looking at the textbook or even just in
a simple sense looking at the professor
maybe the professor's that bad maybe
walk into the classroom take one look at
the professor teaching this class like i
understand why you're depressed oh oh
you got to sit at that desk with that
book and that professor
i understand why you're depressed maybe
maybe it's that obvious but my point is
a detached outsider may not be able to
see why your situation is depressing for
you all right and this gets back to the
root of the self-perceived problem and
the self-perceived cure for the
situation that vegan gains is in
he says in defending his drug habit
again and again that he's so happy that
he can earn a living just by playing
video games
okay richard do you think
i would be happy with that life
do you think
i would be happy if we traded places and
i was living in
your apartment
with your video game system
and your wife
i would want to kill myself
i would rather die
than live the life that you claim
makes you
happy
and the reality is within that same
classroom whether it's two people
sitting at two different desks
studying japanese
right
or you can have two different people who
are studying to be a dentist and one of
them is really happy they really want to
be a dentist and the person at the desk
sitting next to them is like oh i was
forced into this by my parents
really they wanted to be a stand-up
comedian really they wanted to be an
artist or something and they're being
forced to study they're doing the same
work and in some sense they even have
the same motivation like they have to be
motivated enough to study and get the
results or something you know what i
mean and guess what for one of them it's
incredibly depressing right
and for one of them they're completely
happy they could be living the same life
in the same apartment they could be
sleeping with the same woman too two
different people studying uh studying
dentistry in a swinging polyamorous
three-way relationship you know what i
mean you could you could make their
lives strictly comparable in so many
different ways and what one of them
experiences as pleasure the other
experiences as pain what one of them
experiences as tremendously uplifting
and positive the other you know
the other is driven to the depths of
despair by
great to have 50 people in the audience
are now going to turn and read your
comments comment if you want to and
again if you have a moment hit the
thumbs up button it'll help more people
uh join our audience and they can
participate to whatever extent in this
conversation
uh great comment from uh alatera make
more videos about language learning
it's very unlikely it's a lot of work
and uh unfortunately i just don't have a
big enough audience for it um
but we'll see i talked about that a
couple days ago with my girlfriend
melissa we could we could get into
certain kinds of low effort things so we
could live stream ourselves practicing
the language or studying the language we
could make updates talking about new
words i learned this week we could do
some kinds of language learning uh
videos but if you don't if simply if you
don't have a large enough audience
you're not making enough money it's just
to work alone you know i don't have a
fluent chinese speaker with me or
something um it's a lot of work for very
very little reward
and also by the way i get a lot of fan
mail i can actually read that fan mail
to you guys because it's quite
interesting and in relation to the title
the subject of this video
you know obviously it's not the biggest
impact i have on people's lives you know
the impact we're gonna have right now
with this conversation with talking
about depression and motivation and how
to live a life that's that's the biggest
impact i make and then of course talking
about politics history uh life of the
mind knowing stuff too
oh yeah ethics
we talk about ethics sometimes
talk about being a good person
sometimes
it's part of this conversation too
yeah
so ron sims long time viewer of the
channel says quote i was on
antidepressants on and off for a few
years
after going to a therapist that was
anti-farm anti-drug and keeping it real
with him
uh sorry
so after he met this this therapist he
realized that he was the cause
of his own unhappy life and he flushed
him on the toilet so ron i'm going to
say this both ways though right this
this doesn't this isn't monovalent it's
ambivalent or bivalent it goes both ways
there are people who don't take
responsibility for the extent to which
they're making themselves miserable
and again they may not even perceive it
they don't perceive islam as the problem
in their life they may think islam is
the greatest thing in their life they
don't perceive christianity is the
problem in their life they may receive
the greatest thing they don't perceive
heterosexuality as the problem in their
life they think oh it's great i got
married to this good christian girl and
we have sex once a month it's great but
really they're oppressed homosexual or
whatever their situation is you know
they don't see it as the problem so one
one type of problem is where you're not
recognizing the problems in your life
you're not recognizing the sense with
your response from them but the opposite
happens too and that's part of richard's
story right which is that there are
people who do get their lives together
who do get motivated who do take on a
more positive attitude or have more
ambition right they start living a
better life but they they attribute it
to the drug they think that it's the
drug that made the difference so same
thing with uh
john venus
right
so it's not just that john venus
convinced himself that veganism was
causing his problem right he also
convinced himself that eating meat cures
his problem now obviously the reality is
at least twice
he completely stopped lifting weights he
had a recovery period and then after
that he didn't have this intense joint
pain anymore right you know this may be
partly psychological but i've got to
tell you i've experienced lifting
weights i'm never going to be on that
level i don't want i don't want to ever
bench press 300 pounds ever
you know and go to my grave and i never
bench pressed 300 pounds or if i have i
did it without paying attention back
when i was in conveying it's possible
because i used to slap on more weight
and not always count it uh but i think i
went up to 270 you're saying i forget
but i don't think i have to get 300. but
anyway you know um
but my point is i have enough experience
with lifting weights
to know
if you have had an injury
and then you give yourself some time off
to heal and you recover from the injury
and you go back to the gym you don't do
the same things that injured you before
you modify the way you work out okay i
most unless you're
a complete idiot and this guy devotes
his life to working out i am 100
certain that this guy did an analysis of
what exercises he's doing and in what
order like how much he warms up for them
and that he changed the way he's working
out to avoid joint pain there's no doubt
in my mind right but and i believe him
when he says now after twice stopping
for many months having a period of
recovery whereas tissue damage got the
heal right
and now he finds he's able to work out
again without joint well there's another
explanation for this right one the
actual recovery matter and then two you
started doing something different you
started doing something better but
you're not giving yourself credit for
that you think it's eating a dead cow
that solve your problem okay people do
this
with psychological medication all the
time
okay
now i just say this is beyond the
placebo effect this is into what i like
to call the graven idol effect so right
now i'm trying to do 200 push-ups a day
i don't care if it's every second day
like i don't have to do every day 200
push-ups terms how much time i got but i
want 200 push-ups to do my regular thing
and by the way i have my feet elevated
way the hell up so it's a lot harder
than normal push-ups it's a lot a bigger
percentage of your body weight and i
changed the elevation so that's actually
a pretty significant workout itself 200
push-ups where you move the feet up and
down and i'm in my mid 40s now people
okay i'm an old man so that's what i
want to do
what if i told you you know
i was really mopey i was really
distracted with other things i had these
other problems and i wasn't doing the
200 push-ups that i wanted to do and
then
i went to the hardware store
and i bought a wooden log
and i bought
bought a paring knife
started
i whittled the log down
into an image
of the god hanuman
and started worshiping
this idol every morning before i went to
the gym i'd wake up i'd focus my mind to
get all pumped up
and i started participating in this
religious ceremony
worshiping a block of wood
that i've carved into an idol and then
you know what it's amazing what progress
i made
in terms of weightlifting in terms of
doing 200 pushups a day it's not because
of the graven idol
you have the cause and effect the wrong
way around there are people who finally
get motivated to quit smoking quit
drinking alcohol
improve their relationship with their
wife or their parents
change their career they get motivated
to get their act together and change
their lives and it's no coincidence at
the same time they start talking to a
therapist and the therapist refers them
to a psychiatrist and they start taking
these drugs
and then they're able to say to you
since i started taking this drug my
whole life improved everything got
better you got better you made it better
it wasn't the block of wood it wasn't
the graven idol okay it wasn't the pill
you're giving credit to the pill for
changing your life when you changed your
life and it started with you changing
your attitude and you getting positively
motivated
all right and dude it would be the same
if instead of a block of wood that's
graven into an idol if instead it's a
negative it's not a it's not a
worshipful
sentiment it's not a positive loving
emotion like you you love this god or
whatever people love jesus you know what
if you bought
a doll and you make it into a voodoo
doll and you're doing some ritual that's
based on hatred it's based on revenge
okay i hate the the doll doesn't do
anything for you okay the doll doesn't
cure your depression the doll doesn't
provide you with
motivation what have you okay it's you
so it's you positively and negatively
and now the other thing i don't think i
have to repeat this
also a lot of your problems are not you
a lot of your problems are just the real
world they're not you and they're also
not a biologically real chemical
imbalance in your brain that can be
cured by a pill right like oh you're
going to a university it's a really bad
university it's not you right
you're in a marriage that's a really bad
marriage well
at most that's 50 of you you know it's
not it's not all you your parents maybe
your father is an alcoholic really
simple well it's not you that's your
father your father's an alcoholic and
he's making your life miserable
so
whether it's your job your school
whatever
you know there of course there can be
all kinds of things that are that are
not you but they're also not going to be
cured by taking a pill not even if it's
something as as powerful as cocaine
cocaine totally changes your attitude
and motivation you know also kills you
side effects include death
you know
so i'm reading your comments thanks for
writing thumbs up guys i do appreciate
that
um talk about placebo effect even if
it's just placebo effect i appreciate
you guys uh hitting thumbs up
oh so that's interesting erasmus used to
be a student of psychology in university
rasmus writes in and says quote i've
always been super skeptical of
antidepressants and the chemical
imbalance theory that's one of the
reasons he quit studying psychology so
that's something we talk about here is
whether or not it'll be worthwhile as
activists to get into that field but it
would be very depressing to go through
the formal education process where
you're being taught again and again that
antidepressants uh cure everybody's
problems
um only to go on to be some kind of uh
critic trying to change the world trying
to help people that way so jimbo
smithers asks about thomas zazz so
thomas zazz is famous for having the the
hardest name to spell
in the history of the world yeah i got
to tell you something i basically hate
thomas says
um
you know i think he's an idiot he's
deceased now he was an idiot and you
know he was right about a lot of things
he was also wrong about a lot of things
and you know um you can hear his
philosophy of libertarianism slash
anarcho-capitalism what he has to say
about freedom and politics and so on you
can hear what he says about other drugs
like what he has to say about heroin and
cocaine recreational uh addictive drugs
and
you know i think it's reasonable to come
to the conclusion that thomas zazz was a
complete idiot
but
he published really popular influential
books that in dramatic fashion argued
against
um
the psychiatric establishment and
there's so much wrong with the
psychiatric establishment that even an
imbecile like thomas says can can make a
big positive difference in the world by
pointing the finger and criticizing it
yeah so that that is what i have to say
about thomas
and you know obviously by the way guys
when bad people do good things i'm happy
for them
you know i think you could say that
about john venus like john venus is a
terrible person but for a few years he
was doing something positive in the
world he was promoting the vegan diet
not anymore
but i mean you can now see
intellectually ethically emotionally
he's a terrible person
but you know if terrible people can do
something good i'm happy for them so you
know i do not regard thomas as a good
person or a good scientist or a good
author but obviously in as much as he
actually did something good i'm
i'm happy for him
yeah so tcat is raising an issue and
it's significant that it hasn't been
mentioned already it's not 55 minutes
into the video tcat says quote three
common side effects of antidepressants
weight gain sexual dysfunction and
nausea so in many of my videos i just
have on screen as text very briefly the
list of the
the side effects
so you know look
scientifically either you regard these
antidepressants as having absolutely
zero positive effect and a really
significant negative effect and
it's important to say it's not just side
effect
there's a negative direct effect apart
from side effects right
or
you know when some scientists argue this
and i get it i've seen that or you argue
that it has this incredibly small
benefit incredibly small positive effect
but really serious
negative side effects and you then hold
those in the balance i think it's
important just to point out my argument
is not based on side effects and it's
not based on this kind of calculus of
balancing the positive against the
negative that's not how i see it
now
i had a girlfriend
many many years ago and
you know i first met her when we were in
high school together and we kissed and
so on when we were in high school but we
didn't didn't have sex we were both
virgins at that time
and then we didn't talk for a bunch of
years and then later we got together and
we had a real relationship it's a lot
more than kissing
going on
now
this girlfriend of mine
was a feminist
and when she was in high school i can
tell you feminism was a much more
negative part of her life
than islam is a negative part of the
lives of the majority of muslims far
worse
okay far worse
obviously i'm not making the claim that
all feminists
are in this ways victims of feminist
ideology okay but this girlfriend of
mine and you can imagine this is her
relationship with me was a huge part of
her life and her intellectual
development given all those years that i
was a part of her life and i'm a big
influence on everyone in my life i'm a
big influence on my male friends and i'm
completely heterosexual and they aren't
in love with me you know what i mean
okay so i came into her life at one
stage in high school
and for her at that time
feminism was this all-encompassing
worldview of hating men
and blaming men and seeing everything
wrong with the world as being the fault
of men obviously she had started
thinking about this in a childlike way
she was carrying on with it developing
it as a
you know as a teenager
and to give an illustration of how deep
this was you know her perspective on
christianity at the time she wasn't an
atheist no no she thought christianity
was good
but the problem was patriarchy the
problem was everything men did within it
she thought there was this like
matrifocal woman-centered version of
christianity that was a wonderful
religion she was into like a feminist
regeneration of christianity you know
that's that's really [ __ ] crazy okay
and like this was her perspective on
everything in the world like it's one
thing to say oh blame men like no like
this is like more crazy than
anti-semitism and blaming all the
problem in the world on jewish people it
really was this was really an incredibly
you know violent vindictive
ideology she'd bought into and that that
was how she lived that was how she
talked that was how she
perceived the world she saw men
as her enemies
in this really authentically crazy way
now um
when she came back into my life
she had
completely discarded that world view and
that ideology
and she told me i only know this from
which she had a period in between where
she was in the transition
where she was actually turned on by a
lot of kinky sex stuff that was like
directly the opposite of feminism was
like denigrating toward women like you
know
she wasn't like that when i was with her
does not does not take a degree in
psychology to interpret this this would
be like someone who was a pro you know a
catholic and then they have a period
where they're really turned on by
sacrilege or dressing up like a nun or
something you know what i mean and
desecrating the church and what's what's
sacred and holy what had been said or so
she you know kind of the pendulum swung
out the other way and then you know
um
so you know if i had been talking to her
back when she was in high school so
whatever let's say 16 17 i think we were
still 18 in high school in canada at
that time because the where our system
worked uh i think americans leave high
school before that you know four years
versus five years for for high school
it's a big difference um
you know
she wasn't happy of course she wasn't
happy because also she was at heart a
very conventional
heterosexual woman who wanted to get
married and have kids the reality of who
she was and what she wanted was as
starkly different from the feminist and
lesbian ideology she'd signed up for it
was as starkly different as being a
repressed homosexual who's a devout
muslim it's totally different it was
irreconcilable right and she even tried
she tried being a lesbian
because it was cool it was part of her
religion well she didn't really have
what it took to be a lesbian you know um
but she she tried
um
there's no way you could have talked to
her when she was a crazy mixed up
16 year old and said look the reason why
you're depressed
the reason why you're unhappy
is because of this political ideology
you're a part of and it's ruining your
life
if she had gone to talk to a
psychiatrist at 16 because she wasn't
happy i don't tell you everything but
you can imagine she was a very unhappy
uh 16 year old
if she had gone to talk to a
psychiatrist there is no way any
psychiatrist would have talked to this
16 year old girl and said well look the
problem is feminism like the problem is
you're politically never i don't think
they would even ask about that they
probably would have asked like how's
your relationship with your mother how's
your relationship with your father that
would have probably asked very
conventional therapeutic questions
however you want to put it
right so this is again the point about
what a detached outsider's perspective
is but but sorry if she had gone to see
a psychiatrist they would say oh you
have a wonderful life oh and you've
already tried everything to make it
better oh you should take this pill
obviously you have major depressive
disorder right like there isn't any
problem with what you believe there
isn't any problem with your attitude
there isn't any problem with the
decisions you make she made decisions we
all do as teenagers you make decisions
that shape your long-term future forever
as a teenager they have terrible
long-term knock-on effects right in
terms of career and everything else you
know and you're making the wrong
decisions because of this this crank
ideology right
they would have given her a pill
and that pill can't cure her
any more than it can cure
you or me or anyone else in this
audience right
it can't reconcile
it can't you know
it can't reconcile you with your faith
regardless of whether that faith is a
conventional religion or you know so
that's that's the level of discourse and
critique and analysis
i'm engaging in here
so from my perspective it seems almost
irrelevant
to talk about side effects
but i do have videos talking about that
and the side effects are
terrifying
and if you take even the most common
antidepressants you are rolling the dice
you are risking your life it is totally
possible you will get a condition like
acatesia i have videos talking about
that it is totally possible you will be
physically disabled for the rest of your
life and you will never
come back it is quite possible this will
be a life-altering life-ruining decision
that you've made to [ __ ] around with
antidepressants and you know what
statistically
it is also more likely that they will
just do nothing for you that you will
have no perceived
benefit and no perceived side effects
even though we know as a fact it is
causing you brain damage that every
single day you take the drug it is
causing permanent irreparable brain
damage that you never get but you may
not be able to perceive it
so all of those
are tragic all
but i'm trying to get at the most the
most fundamental parts of the equation
the most fundamental uh
the most fundamental question leading to
the most fundamental answer
and you know why most people make the
wrong choices because they don't have
any of this vocabulary they've never
talked it through with anyone they don't
have anyone who would sit down and talk
to them for one hour the way i've been
doing this live stream for one hour and
talk about their situation
let alone provide them with a whole
bunch of other you know comparative
examples
okay so the comment from lazy baby
chicken who i haven't heard of before
welcome to the crowd lazy
lazy baby chicken says quote i am just
glad that vegan gains experience has
improved even if it may be largely
placebo
do you feel that way about eating meat
do you feel that way about getting on a
100 meat diet
i don't
i don't feel happy for people
who quit eating vegetables entirely eat
a 100 meat diet say they have amazing
weight loss and muscle gain and they
feel so much better and their whole life
hasn't proven they get on the internet
and preach about it because they feel
better
right
of course it's a placebo of course it's
a plus are you [ __ ] kidding me 100
meat diet will literally kill you you'll
die of scurvy
i mean it's deadly it's such a bad diet
right but all of a sudden you've got a
lot of fat and a lot of salt
and zero fiber in your diet you feel
different and all these middle aged
people they think it's a second youth
they found the you know
what's it called the fountain of youth
that they go wow
and you know whether or not they're
using
steroids or what have you
they they i'm not i'm not happy for you
you're taking up you're getting the
placebo effect i'm not happy for you at
all
all right some people
are awake and some people are asleep
okay now vegan gains has defined his
role on the internet
as doing scientific research
to educate people right that's supposed
to be the core of who he is and what he
does and he has mysteriously not done
the research on this now you can tell me
when was the last time he did do
research you may not have noticed but in
his live stream
just before saying that he had tried
everything and thus he had tried taking
antidepressants
right he said he even tried
taking
mushrooms hallucinogenic mushrooms
even
because he claimed there's scientific
research
proving that these hallucinogenic
mushrooms can
cure depression
i've seen the scientific research
richard
i've i've done research on this
okay
i mean the extent to which this is
self-deception cannot be
exaggerated this is just as ridiculous
as a christian telling you that prayer
cures cancer
okay cancer sometimes does go into
remission and cancer sometimes goes into
spontaneous remission okay
whoever you are
you know i'm not happy for you i'm not
happy for you because you have the
placebo effect
if you were praying
and then your cancer went into remission
okay no telling people that prayer cured
your cancer or that a specific saint in
the catholic church cured your cancer
because you prayed to them it's bad and
evil and wrong
okay if you're a middle-aged person and
you're tired of being
kind of pot bellied and out of shape
and you decide to change your life
you're gonna exercise more you're gonna
have a second youth you're gonna get
motivated you're gonna start cheating on
your wife again you're gonna have a
better sex life or something you know
this is what's going on with a lot of
these guys
the fact that you started eating a
carnivore diet or uh
what they call the stone age diet the
caveman diet one of these
the fact you started doing one of these
meat heavy diets okay that's not the
cause of the improvement you've
experienced it's not and i'm not happy
for you to go around attributing the
change in your life which you know again
you may have changed a lot of things you
may have started counting calories so
you lose weight you may have started
going to the gym you may have started
cheating on your wife etc etc are there
all these things you've changed you also
just changed your attitude you decided
you wanted to make a change in your life
like that in itself you decided you want
to make a big dramatic change that's
much more important than the fact that
you're now eating meat three times a day
you're eating steak through most days
you signed up on this so-called caveman
diet you decided you wanted to be a
caveman you know
you got this idea in your head you know
these things these are like no i'm not
gonna come out here and um
you know encourage people to ruin their
lives by trying to imitate
you know these idols on the internet
who are reporting the placebo effect as
if it were
a medically real scientifically real
benefit whether that's from diet or drug
that is bad and evil and wrong
you know and guys just notice i'm a
vegan
but i am not even claiming you can't
improve your life
while you switch to
100 meat diet people do it all the time
okay and really like the evidence is
real okay
but guess what people have a mid-life
crisis and they start doing cocaine
they start doing cocaine and going to
nightclubs and
i don't endorse that either okay i'm
here to tell you what's right and what's
wrong
okay if you want to change your life
say the same thing about converting to
islam
you can totally change your life around
because you had a mid-life crisis and
you converted to islam and among other
things you quit drinking alcohol when
you converted islam is totally against
drinking alcohol because you didn't know
i can totally see how someone can come
on and give a testimony about how they
were depressed and their life was
miserable and then they converted to
this new religion and everything got
better guess what islam is still
bad and evil and wrong okay so no i'm
not out here saying i'm happy for anyone
who feels they've improved their life or
feels that they're doing better because
of the the placebo effect i think that's
a tremendously dangerous thing
um in all these areas including politics
including feminism you know something as
seemingly harmless as feminism does
indeed ruin people's lives
right let's sorry i am reading your
comments it's coming guys
um
but let's also question another thing
the first the first sentence from lazy
baby chicken quote
i am just glad
that vegan gains experience has improved
what's improved
what has improved okay i'm just being
real with you
i think when he started eating a vegan
diet nothing improved he claimed he was
miraculously secured he'd solved all his
psychological problems by switching to a
vegan diet he no longer had depression
he no longer had hallucinations he never
had all these psychological problems oh
and then guess what a few months later
he admitted it didn't work he had this
period of time where he said that taking
hallucinogenic mushrooms
had totally cured him and totally
changed his life it totally solved his
psychological problem okay
it's not true
this is someone who lies about his
health outcomes mental health outcomes
and physical health outcomes again and
again and again he lied about having a
vasectomy right he did have a vasectomy
he lied about what the actual outcomes
were he had terrible side effects he had
terrible debilitating pain and awful
side effects and he's permanently
scarred by it he's a very visible scar
now for the rest of his life it really
had a tremendously negative impact on
his life for at least one year but i
think it was more like two years or
three years he had all these terrible
side effects but there's still videos on
the internet where he's saying it's the
most wonderful thing everyone should
sign up to do it
so look
uh guys
okay i feel like so this will be kind of
a
a brief digression but um
it's not that much of a digression
you'll see it's it's right on topic
um i got fan mail from a member of the
audience
i'm going to read it to you
okay so a viewer
uh wrote in
i'm going to leave this viewer anonymous
for obvious reasons he says quote dear
mr mazzart i've been watching your
channel for years
i too have questioned your motives at
times
i thought i had thought you enjoyed
condemning people for their weaknesses
but now i think that was unfair
when you described your struggles and
setbacks and being on youtube in taoism
and daniel so that's a great video by
the way it's a couple days ago but
there's a video called that was him and
daniel i think it's one of the best
videos on my channel
anyway so the fan says when you describe
your struggles and setbacks uh induced
by being on youtube in taoism and daniel
it finally struck home that you were a
real person i.e not just a face on the
internet who has real and positive
motivations why else would you endure
these years of abuse period life on the
internet has made me cynical period my
judgment was unjust so i can i can write
more of this
but at this point one of the things i
want to kind of
encourage you to to think about is this
um
you know why am i criticizing richard
why are we talking about this what are
my motivations
right
and what are his motivations okay
i think that people who don't have
good motivations to help others have a
great deal of difficulty in recognizing
it when other people demonstrate it
right
um
i talked a lot this is maybe two years
ago i talked a lot about humanitarian
work
and saying to richard directly
you
should do humanitarian work you should
actually get out and help people
okay now some people could misinterpret
that the same way this this fan says
that in the past houston is interpreted
you can misinterpret that as just being
oh this guy is mazzard he is just
showing that he's morally superior to
vegan gains to richard that he's just
looking down his nose and saying oh
you're not morally pure like me because
i do humanitarian work and you don't or
you should be more
you can misinterpret it that way right
but again if you actually go back and
watch those videos or you just listen to
me say it now no
i'm actually making this recommendation
for richard's benefit i'm really saying
you can be a better person you can be
happier in your own life you can have a
more meaningful life you will benefit by
doing this humanitarian work even if the
people you went out to try to help let's
say you go to the border of syria now
with the syrian civil war even if they
don't benefit or even if you have an
incredibly tiny
you know positive effect on the world
like you managed to feed a couple
starving people you know but that's
about it and you know this is years of
your life that go into it okay so like
okay it's easy to misread it and i know
because richard wrote to me at that time
i didn't he probably talked about in a
live stream and i didn't hear it but i
know he wrote to me richard responded
that a hundred percent negatively as if
it's just me trying to pwn him as if
it's me just trying to insult him or
snub him or something and he wrote back
to me all angry he wrote back to me
talking about the size of my penis
natural source of envy in his case
talking about saying oh well you think
you're morally superior to me no i well
i don't see you going and helping uh you
know people refugees in syria or
something right
okay you know it may be hard for you to
understand from the outside right but i
mean that suggestion really sincerely
really positively now i have other
experiences in life right i spent many
many years in a university and at
different universities so because of my
ex-wife i spent a lot of time at
cambridge university england and oxford
there's a bus
that links them
i have never said and i never would say
to richard you know richard what you
really need to turn your life around is
to go and study at cambridge university
england it would be great for you it
would really because i don't believe
that
okay i think richard could
i think richard would be more depressed
i think his life would be worse
if he kind of got his paperwork together
and got his money together
and went and enrolled to study any of
the subjects i'm familiar with at
cambridge university england that's
that's sincere okay i know
obviously any of you in the audience
could say well look currently the guy
just spends his time doing hardcore porn
and playing video games on the internet
come on isn't it an improvement for him
to go to cambridge university england
totally reasonable perspective it
probably has people's life saying that
look why don't you take your money and
your fame and go to cambridge university
england why don't you go to some
university start studying something
start learning something start okay i'm
telling you in terms of my experience in
life and my knowledge of richard as a
person i can't say that that would be
insincere for me to say hey dude this is
the cure
for your depression this is how you can
live a more meaningful life okay
but what i can say about richard and
from my perspective this guy does not
even have like a high school level
education i'm not claiming he didn't go
to high school i'm claiming he didn't
really learn what you're supposed to
have learned while you were in high
school this guy is a very very low level
of education i can say to you sincerely
okay richard this is the kind of guy you
are
these are the advantages and
disadvantages you have in life i'm
saying for you
sincerely you can turn your life around
if right now you roll up your sleeves
and start getting involved in
humanitarian work if you really
seriously and selflessly
start helping other people including
other people who hate you and who will
never thank you for it
okay like including people where you you
help them and in return they swear at
you and spit at you
even that experience like i really
believe richard that you can improve
your life and let's say it you can never
be depressed again
you can really profoundly change your
life forever you can have a series of
meaningful experiences and you can learn
and you can grow as a person by getting
out and doing humanitarian work and
learning a new language and studying a
new culture and struggling struggling to
respect people and struggling to have
them respect you and immersing yourself
in in real life and real political
problems as they unfold and living at
this much higher level of of engagement
all right
vegan gains says he had to take this
pill because he tried everything and
nothing worked well richard you didn't
try that
richard you say you're so proud that you
can just sit and play video games to
earn a living and you know if i was
doing that i would want to kill myself
okay you're living a life that's not fit
for a human being
and you think you're so goddamn happy
doing it the same way a repressed
homosexual who's a devout muslim thinks
that his religion makes him happy when
in fact his religion is making him
israel the same way my ex-girlfriend who
was a crazy feminist extremist
thought feminism was the most powerful
positive thing in her life she thought
it was the greatest thing and that was
what was making her depressed it was
what was ruining her life but she
thought it was the best thing in her
life richard you say you've tried
everything okay but you never tried
quitting video games you never tried
doing humanitarian work you never
even tried setting yourself a schedule
to read two books a month and come on
youtube and do book reviews like you
never challenge yourself to grow
intellectually to set aside childish
things to stop playing with dolls to
stop playing with action figures to stop
playing with video games and start to
take on some truly adult
responsibilities challenges aspirations
ambitions and then to get the kind of
gratification that comes not just with
success but failure okay when you're
pursuing those ambitions you're someone
who hasn't grown because you never took
on those higher ambitions it's
completely obvious to any detached
outsider
why you're miserable and it's not
obvious to you because you're too
close to it
i do see your questions and comments as
they come in people
um
[Music]
okay i'll digress on this just a moment
so someone in the audience called eliza
says quote
reducing regular alcohol consumption has
had a huge impact in helping her feel
less depressed
over the last year close quote okay
so just to come back to it very very
briefly
richard claims that he's read scientific
research
about the effects of
hallucinogenic mushrooms
now
i can tell richard if you read it you
didn't understand it like you don't it's
possible there's a lot of [ __ ]
peer-reviewed studies about about all
these drugs and they're written by
people who are highly motivated to lie
or to present their research in the most
flattering way
um
imaginable okay what what actually is
the effect of alcohol on the brain
in the scientific use of the term it's
called a depressant okay it's a
depressant for both the brain and the
central nervous the whole nervous system
not even your fingers and toes has a
depressant effect on your neurons and
axons through your whole body including
your brain what actually is
the effect of these hallucinogenic
mushrooms on serotonin
richard seeing as you believe in
fundamental theory behind ssris and snri
drugs you know it's the same theory it's
the monoamine reuptake inhibitor theory
which is the same
how
how could both of these theories be true
how could it be true that you believe in
the scientific research
pointing to the specific effect that
those hallucinogenic mushrooms have on
serotonin and you also believe in this
theory about ssris and snr
um
but you guys know most people do not
think these
things through this way they don't
reason them through at all and i think
richard has been honest in stating the
emotional reasoning he did he said oh
well i've tried everything and nothing
works
and he convinces himself out of
desperation to try this thing that on
some level he's aware doesn't work he's
evidently seen enough enough research
uh showing that just
babe do you want to jump in so melissa's
been reading about this quite a lot
lately i mean you could say something
totally at this point because he's like
totally out of left field but i mean
you've done a lot of reading about
one thing i could say is
it's a dangerous decision to start
taking antidepressants
the book that i've been reading
research shows that it makes you more
prone to depression in the future
if you stop taking the antidepressant
you're more likely
to become depressed and start the
antidepressant again and then it gets to
a point quickly where
psychiatrists tell you to not stop
taking them to
never discontinue
to continue taking them forever
and that's what is concerning that it's
becoming something that people do
forever
a forever broken that every day you're
taking and what other a permanent
disability you might say yeah
okay
like psychological substance substance
that you take
um
would you be okay with every day that
having an impact on your brain
yeah would you be okay with taking magic
mushrooms every day
um
hey guys i just got uh i just got good
news in the mail
i got research funding
for this project i've had mine for a
while
um
i didn't tell you about this but i
filled out the application i sent it
into the canadian government and uh i'm
gonna do a research project
on the effects of psychoactive substance
it's going great
we've got cooperation
from the american military
and what they're going to do is
they're going to take a bunch of new
recruits
and they're going to divide them into
two groups and these recruits they're
all the same age and they're pair match
same height same ethnicity we've got two
groups of men who've just come into the
army just gone through basic training
and
50 percent of them
are going to be put in a base
where they drink caffeine every day
every day first thing in the morning
they have a cup of coffee and then
they're free to drink as much or as
little caffeine throughout the rest of
the day as they want to so minimum one
cup of coffee and then the other group
of recruits absolutely zero caffeine and
zero alcohol zero mindless drugs no
other confounding variables whatsoever
while they're on this base
and we're gonna see who gets better
results
we're gonna study in depth
the performance indicators for these men
and here's the best part of all
we're not just doing this on an army
base where they're training them to be
snipers or pilots
we're doing this with the defense
language institute so these guys are
doing some physical training they're
learning to run up and down stairs and
climb a hill and shoot a gun but they're
also learning a foreign language so a
lot of them are studying arabic i can
understand why in terms of current
american wars and what have you you know
but they're learning like so we're going
to be able to study in detail
who learns a language faster
who's in better shape physically oh
we're going to survey a whole range of
indicators we're going to examine who
would do better if you had two groups of
soldiers one group of whom are drinking
coffee first thing in the morning every
day and the other has zero caffeine
wouldn't that be fascinating doesn't
that sound really rewarding and
interesting because you know we're all
familiar with caffeine as a drug
we all know it has some advantages and
disadvantages and we think about our own
lives
which would really be better for me if
i'd signed up for the army in some ways
right i'd have an advantage whether it's
working out at the gym or studying
language of the textbook at my wand
caffeine but in some ways there's really
an advantage i mean like how well you
sleep you know and then how that affects
other things gee i really i really don't
know oh
sorry i meant magic mushrooms
i meant we're going to have one army
unit
who every single day gets high on magic
mushrooms and is hallucinating and
another army unit which is sober which
one you think is going to have better
outcomes or better results all you
[ __ ] kidding me there's no question
all right
caffeine
has some
positive benefits
right and there are also
negative side effects all right caffeine
is a drug that we tolerate in our
society for this reason and and i'm
i think the negative side effects are
serious they get me i do
okay
if you actually believe
that ssri antidepressant drugs have a
benefit a real benefit
or if you believe that snri
antidepressant drugs have a real benefit
or wellbutrin or xanax and xanax is not
a ssri but i'm just saying any of these
other classifications of drugs
benzodiazepines
haldol any of these psycheds okay if you
believe there's a real benefit
that means that you believe that if we
do this experiment
with two groups of soldiers going into
the military and one group is taking
haldol every day
or one group is taking prozac every day
every single day they're starting their
day with a dose of this mind-altering
drug that you think they would perform
better
they would perform better than the
soldiers
that are clean and sober
okay
nobody believes that
with all this excuse making and all
these digressions and distractions from
the really important questions of how to
be happy
how to lead a meaningful life we're kind
of
circumambulating the big issue of what
is it you really believe
the positive effects of this drug are
what what is it you think you're going
to benefit because i'm willing to admit
caffeine has positive benefits i would
be willing to admit
adderall has positive benefits right if
you have two groups of soldiers and one
of them is getting high on adderall
every day and the other is clean and
sober i'm not sure who would learn more
chinese in six months who would learn
more arabic in six months i'm not sure
who would do better in terms of physical
conditioning weight lifting right some
of those stimulant drugs they have
benefits there are also really serious
negative side effects right but i can
admit that i can say there are
trade-offs here and if we do that
research i'm not sure what we're going
to find i would assume by the way if
you're really doing it in depth you're
going to find that certain types of
personalities perform better with
caffeine certain types of personalities
maybe excel when given
adderall and others do terribly that
there will be some people like look this
adderall is driving me crazy like they
can't cope with it the effects at all
there's some people who respond really
negatively even to caffeine even though
most people use caffeine intersect
there's some people from the effects are
too negative or the effect on their
sleep is too negative the effect on
their emotions is too negative they
can't handle uh taking caffeine at all
okay but nobody believes that if you
split up these two groups of super
soldiers and you put one of them on
antidepressants
that they are going to be better
soldiers that they are somehow going to
outperform their competition and looking
at your own life
nobody really believes that this is
giving you a benefit where if you could
split those two pads
that you really would have performed
better in this sense nobody believes to
put it this way
that antidepressants are a performance
enhancing drug
and isn't that the greatest irony of all
that richard vegan gaines
someone who became
famous
by researching and criticizing the
minutia of performance-enhancing drugs
that really work
okay make no mistake
anavar works okay steroids
work
all right
don't do them i'm morally opposed to it
i think they should be illegal okay they
work
this guy built his reputation on
supposedly presenting a scientifically
enlightened perspective on performance
enhancing drugs and now
he's addicted to a drug that is in no
way
performance enhancing and guys
the excuses you make are much harder to
quit
than the drug itself
i'm gonna keep reading this fan mail
um
so if you weren't here i'm continuing to
read a letter from an appreciative
member of the audience and he says quote
you're one of the only people i know of
who can offer a sincere and unique
perspective on almost any social or
political issue for example this is a
funny example but it's an interesting
one for example your take on the purpose
of museums that they offer a unique
chance to challenge dominant regional
narratives as in detroit was shocking to
me all my life had it seemed natural
normal and inevitable that museums were
recreational cheerleading centers with a
veneer of science that they were merely
celebratory
to challenge something so fundamental
has made me take the functions of my
society less for granted i do not know
where else i might have learned this
similarly your take that shyness can be
an expression of shame has prompted me
to rethink my occasionally debilitating
shyness and deep sense of shame at being
someone with normal thoughts and wants
so he's recognizing the extent of which
his own desires are normal and are not
this special character trait called
shyness this also relates to depression
to what extent you have normal desires
and normal problems normal
disappointments okay i continue the
quote quote it i it did feel like your
advice was more directed at trolls than
the ordinary shy people though those who
are well-meaning but reticent this
advice has been uncomfortable but
valuable
you know what i keep saying you guys get
uncomfortable oh this of course
he said so his final paragraph he says
your honesty sincerity and level of
research make your channel by some
margin the most unique channel that i
watch on youtube while i do not watch as
much as i used to i admire your ability
to offer something uniquely distinctly
you
it takes courage and i am grateful for
your efforts
okay so i want to go back to the very
first paragraph right and what he said
there briefly um he said
uh
he's watched the channel for years and
he has questioned my motives at times
because he had thought that i enjoy
condemning people for their weaknesses
right now i'm just being wrong with you
so we have 48 people in the audience now
hit thumbs up if you have a second uh
helps more people discover the video
okay
if this is the only time you've heard me
talk in your life this is the first
video you've ever seen
does anyone think that i am enjoying
condemning
richard for his weaknesses that i'm
enjoying condemning being answered do
you think that's what's going on for me
psychologically or internally
there have been other people who come up
i'm not enjoying condemning
john venus
i'm not enjoying condemning nina miranda
right so using this guy for whatever
reason he was interpreting my videos as
if they're presented in this
mean-spirited way and i got into saying
look to some extent someone like richard
himself he can't recognize my good
intentions when i'm demonstrating them
like richard when i'm talking to you
about humanitarian work when i'm talking
about the importance of reading and of
really challenging yourself to read
things you're not already you're not
already a self-appointed expert in where
you're you're out of your own comfort
zone getting uncomfortable and and
learning new things and growing the
stuff i'm talking about richard
that's that's not me being cruel to you
that's not me enjoying snubbing you or
being mean to you of course it's hard
for me to see because that's what he
does
what he does is he enjoys snubbing
people he enjoys being mean to people he
enjoys being cruel to people insulting
and denigrating to people i mean okay
that's not what's going on here that's
not what i enjoy i'm i'm i'm yes i'm
partly sincerely trying to help you
obviously that's incredibly unlikely to
work the reality is i'm sincerely trying
to help people in the audience who may
have some of the same problems you have
and even this piece of fan mail and even
comments from the audience during this
lesson it does help people so i am
helping people and i'm a motivated
people i'm just going to react to the
phrasing of that okay
he says i thought you enjoyed condemning
people for their weaknesses doesn't that
describe richard perfectly like richard
what makes you happy
you you really seem to be happy when
you're condemning people for their
weaknesses you don't seem to be happy
when you're helping
anyone else ever you don't have a
charitable bone in your body you know
what i mean
well i'll ask you this question and i'll
close the video
you know this is not an easy easy
question for people to answer okay
what is it that makes you happy
when are you happy when can you say
doing this
makes me happy
and can it change
you guys didn't know me during the years
of my life
but there was absolutely a big chunk of
my life
where my answer to the question
of what makes you happy would be
research i absolutely thought of the
happiest thing in my life not
necessarily the most meaningful or the
most important
as
research
you know
and um
even in that context like cambridge
england and oxford england you know you
met all these people
they were behaving like models and
actresses in hollywood or something
they're behaving like this is a
popularity contest and this is about
who's sleeping with who and who's
getting nepotism they were behaving like
no talent models and actors people who
weren't trying to get ahead on their the
merit of their work there was all this
skullduggery
at cambridge and oxford really
and you know
i'm meeting people in time with look
look bro i'm i'm about this research
like this like what are you what are you
here for like this is
like really like what the [ __ ] is wrong
with you
like
i
so there's a huge gap and you felt it
every day
alienating you from other people that
way it's like what
and i gotta say um
it was really weird specifically in
cambodia when i was in phnom penh
cambodia so you guys know i've lived in
many countries in many different
situations but it was most striking
when i went to events in phnom penh
cambodia and there are these other
people who were doing charity work they
were attached to humanitarian work
charity work and there were other people
attached to research specifically
research foundations or search positions
for search jobs
uh i also saw this in in vientiane the
capital city of laos i've seen this
place but it was really really striking
in cambodia
and it's like
bruh
you're here to [ __ ] [ __ ]
like
literally
that's what they're here for there were
people who were in it for the money and
there were people who were in it for the
sex
and like sometimes the sex is as as
simple as prostitution
sometimes it's more complicated oh jesus
could i ever tell stories holy [ __ ]
there were people who were in it for the
ego trip
like oh there are all these perverse you
know motives and it's like
like bruh like
i'm here for the research
and i'm here to actually help people and
these kinds of conversations come again
and again be like
dude like if i were motivated by my sex
life why would i be in cambodia like
what the [ __ ] is wrong with you like
this just makes no sense to me like what
like you know you like you're running an
orphanage for your sex life
and dude that is not a [ __ ]
exaggeration it gets dark okay you you
there are catholic foundations and there
are protests
there are people doing humanitarian work
with dark ones but even when it's the
foundations that are like handing out
sacks of rice to starving people that
are doing you know starvation related
food security food insecurity or stuff
like like dude this is what you're about
this is what motivates you like i'm here
for this research and i'm actually here
to make the world a better place which
concludes the research does understand
right like like these are my motives and
like even even the money thing like
we're sitting here
you want to talk to me about money
like
i could be working in real estate i
could be working in real estate in
toronto canada at that time one of the
hottest fastest growing real estate
markets and i i knew one guy who worked
the stock market in toronto but i could
be playing the stock market in toronto
under six different headaches i can be
flipping tech stocks during the tech
moon like you you're you're about money
um
okay
what is it you enjoy doing
okay so i'm telling you for i don't know
what it was 10 years of my life let's
just say 10 years to make it a round
number okay there's 10 years my life
where i could describe this that this is
what i enjoyed this is what made me
happy this is what my life was kind of
most
centrally about and then the bizarre
contrast i had to other people it's like
i can't i can't believe you're here in
this same place in the same time in the
same line of work with me and your
motivations are so totally alien from
mine right
but it changed
okay it can change and i would even go
further and say it must change you won't
stay the same you keep growing even if
you don't try even if you don't want to
even if you want to stay the same
okay what was meaningful to you at 16
it's not going to be the same at 26 and
it's not going to be the same at 36 and
it's not going to be the same at 46.
most people completely assume that they
stop changing after they finish
university or so maybe maybe 22 maybe 25
or something like oh and now i'm just
gonna be the same person forever
wrong
the [ __ ] you thought was meaningful the
[ __ ] you enjoyed
at 25 you can't enjoy anymore at 35 that
goes for your job that goes for your
intellectual life the life of your mind
guess what bad news might go for your
marriage
you don't enjoy [ __ ] the same person
anymore you don't enjoy making excuses
for that person anymore you don't enjoy
helping them and being involved in their
life anymore you thought they were
profound before now you think they're
[ __ ] shallow they used to make you
happy you know they make you miserable
it's it's tragic a lot of people get
married at 25 and get the force to 35.
okay it's it's
tragic a lot of people commit to being a
dentist they think they're going to be
so [ __ ] happy for the rest of their
life being a dentist and it's positive
and they help people and they make a lot
of money and guess what after you've
been doing it for 10 years you're 35 and
you'd rather [ __ ] chew your arm off
to get out of this bear trap you'll do
anything to get out of dentistry you've
got to change or and you didn't want to
change but you changed what you enjoy
right what makes you happy changed
okay research doesn't mean to me what it
used to anymore okay humanitarian work
doesn't mean what he's doing charity
work doesn't mean anyone used to writing
books publishing doesn't mean to me what
he used to do more going to university
studying writing essays for some old man
who grades them doesn't mean to me what
he used to anymore
okay i didn't choose that i didn't
choose to change i changed and i'm 100
confident the person i am today is a
better person than what i was 10 years
ago and 20 years ago richard you can't
be so certain
okay richard you're a worse person now
than you were 10 years ago
here's the [ __ ] hook richard
you think playing with dolls
can make you happy
you think playing with action figures
can make you happy you think reading
comic books can make you happy
i was a kid once too
okay i read comic books when i was a
child
i played with wooden blocks
when i was a child
okay and wooden blocks just can't be for
me
what they once
were okay and there are guys who worked
so hard
to play baseball at like an elite level
and richard used to do that with hockey
right and then you get to a certain age
a certain stage in life and baseball
can't be for you what it once was the
wooden blocks can't be for you the
playing with dolls or action figures
reading comic books it can't be for you
what it once was you can't be that
stupid
anymore not even
if you want to be
okay richard
playing video games
can't be for you
what it once was
if it ever made you happy it's before i
knew you and i look maybe when you were
16 maybe when you were 14 maybe when you
were 12 there was some point in your
life at which playing video games made
you happy okay and it's over and the
tragedy is you don't know it yet and
you've convinced yourself you have a
medical condition
a medical condition that's never existed
that there's no scientific proof for
there's no test for you've convinced
yourself that there's something
biologically wrong with you the same way
that someone who has diabetes someone
who's a diabetic has something
biological with them and it can be cured
with a pill
and you think you've tried everything
but you've tried nothing
you haven't quit video games you haven't
done humanitarian work you haven't even
started reading [ __ ] books you
haven't started educating yourself you
didn't decide to go back to school you
didn't decide to get a profession or a
career you didn't you didn't even try
[ __ ] a different woman richard okay
he didn't even try cheating on your wife
all right and um he says from an
attached outsider's perspective you can
keep telling yourself you have a happy
marriage okay if i were in that marriage
i'd want to kill myself richard
and there are a whole lot of people in
the audience whether or not they're
confident enough being honest with your
face there are a whole lot of people can
look at your life and say if i were
living your life i'd want to kill myself
every aspect of it including your body
dysmorphia obsession
obsessively working out and trying to be
super thin and then trying to be super
heavy and all this stuff dude that looks
like a [ __ ] miserable life every
aspect of it but including the fact that
you are still clinging to
things from your childhood that once
made you happy and you don't even
realize that they can't do that for you
anymore okay
what about this richard
what if it's not just video games and
it's not just action figures and it's
not just comic books and it's not just
pornography
do you have any idea what an impact
pornography had me when i was 13.
wow
well what what effect do you think it
has me today
[Music]
the difference for me between seeing a
woman with her clothes on and her
clothes off is like nothing today okay
when you are a 13 year old male
whoa
like dude you're endorphins but you such
a threat it's so exciting
to see pornography okay something like
that also happens with video games right
with a lot of these things like maybe
when you were 13 or maybe when you were
11 or something maybe you have to go
earlier with that video there was a time
when this was thrilling this was amazing
the time when pornography is amazing
that's over for you richard pornography
is never going to be for you what it was
video games never going to be for you
what it was action figure comic books
what about this thing i just quoted from
this fan mail
okay
what about condemning people for their
weaknesses
what about being mean to people bullying
people intimidating people hurting
people
what if
five years ago
that made you happy
and now it can't anymore
not even if you want it to
what if there's no pill
on any doctor's shelf anywhere
that can help you enjoy
the things that made you happy
just five years ago
because you've changed
what do you want to do richard
do you want to go crawling black to your
blankie
you want to play with wooden blocks
and the little comfort blanket you had
as a child you want to go back to
playing ice hockey
huh
you want to go on
being a trash talking bodybuilder
forever
you want to play call of duty
modern warfare till you're 50 never grow
up never take on new responsibilities
new challenges new horizons
huh or do you want to recognize
the extent to which you've changed stop
looking backwards start looking forward
and embrace the extent to which now
you've got to change
even
more